======================================================================
Changes in 6.?.?
======================================================================

This page lists only the most significant changes as remembered.  Use
git-log to review changes not enumerated here, especially in language
parsers.

New and extended options and their flags
---------------------------------------------------------------------

New option: ``--describe-language=<language>``

    Prints the various aspects of the parser implementing the language.

New column, VER in the output of ``--list-{kinds-full,roles,fields,extras,pseudo-tags}`` options

    Indicates the versions of ctags output (or the parser) introducing the
    item in the list.

Extend ``--map-<LANG>=`` and ``--langmap=`` options to choose a parser using regular expressions

	``--map-<LANG>=[+]%REXPR%`` (or ``--langmap=<LANG>:[+]%REXPR%``) maps relative-paths
	that match the regular expression to the given language.

	The new ``--list-map-rexprs`` lists all regular-expression-based mappings.

	``--list-maps`` has also been extended to include regular-expression-based mappings.

Incompatible changes
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Parser related changes
---------------------------------------------------------------------
JavaScript:

    * A new field "properties" was added to indicate that a field or
      member of a class is static.
    * Class member names prefixed with # are recognized as private.

C#:

    * Fix a bug that prevents the parser from extracting methods
	  if the method has nullable parameters.

Meson:

    * Extract config vars defined inside configuration_data({...}).

Python:

    * Support type statements.

New parsers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The following parsers have been added:

* SINEX: to handle SINEX (Solution INdependent EXchange) files
* Netfilter: to handle the output of "nft list ..." command
* Prolog
* DBusService
* GoMod

Changes about parser specific kinds, roles, fields, and extras
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. See the output of ./misc/news.bash man [v6.2.0]

Readtags
---------------------------------------------------------------------


Merged pull requests
---------------------------------------------------------------------

.. note::

   This list is imperfect. masatake cleaned up some pull requests before
   merging. Though his names is used in "... by ...", his is not the
   primary contributor of the pull requests. See git log for more
   defatils.

.. generated by ./misc/news.bash pr [v6.2.0...]

Issues close or partially closed via above pull requests
---------------------------------------------------------------------

.. generated by ./misc/news.bash issue [v6.1.0...]
